Docs on general precedence (#50201)
ansible/ansible: docs/docsite/rst/reference_appendices/general_precedence.rst

If you use Ansible to manage a large number of servers, network devices, and cloud resources, you may define Ansible behavior in several different places and pass that information to Ansible in several different ways.
This flexibility is convenient, but it can backfire if you do not understand the precedence rules.

These precedence rules apply to any setting that can be defined in multiple ways (by configuration settings, command-line options, playbook keywords, variables). For example, defining connection information, selecting a temporary directory, and choosing the correct python/ruby/powershell/etc interpreter to invoke for a module using settings like ANSIBLE_USER, DEFAULT_LOCAL_TMP, or ANSIBLE_PYTHON_INTERPRETER all follow these precedence rules.

.. contents::
   :local:

Precedence categories
---------------------

Ansible supports four sources for controlling its behavior. In order of precedence from lowest (most easily overridden) to highest (overrides all others), the categories are:

   Configuration settings
   Command-line options
   Playbook keywords
   Variables

> 

Reviewer: Consider flipping this on its head.  When I think "highest", I naturally expect to see it at the top of this bullet list. That might jus be my mental quirk so take w/ a grain o salt.

Reviewer 2: My instinct is the same, but I vote we save that for a future PR. If we flip this list, we also need to flip the [precedence-among-variables list](https://docs.ansible.com/ansible/devel/user_guide/playbooks_variables.html#ansible-variable-precedence), and this PR has enough scope creep already.

Each category overrides any information from all lower-precedence categories. For example, a playbook keyword will override any configuration setting.

Within each precedence category, specific rules apply. However, generally speaking, 'last defined' wins and overrides any previous definitions.

Configuration settings
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

:ref:`Configuration settings<ansible_configuration_settings>` include both values from the ``ansible.cfg`` file and environment variables. Within this category, values set in configuration files have lower precedence. Ansible uses the first ``ansible.cfg`` file it finds, looking in these locations in order:

 * ``ANSIBLE_CONFIG`` (environment variable if set)
 * ``ansible.cfg`` (in the current directory)
 * ``~/.ansible.cfg`` (in the home directory)
 * ``/etc/ansible/ansible.cfg``

> Ansible will use the first ``ansible.cfg`` file found, all others are ignored.

Reviewer: This line seems to be a repeat of the intro line to the list?

You can use the :ref:`ansible-config` command line utility to see the current value of a configuration item and where it came from. (TODO: How does this work? Add example.)

Command-line options
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Any command-line option will override any configuration setting.

At the command line, if you pass multiple values for a parameter that accepts only a single value, the last defined value wins. For example, this :ref:`ad-hoc task<intro_adhoc>` will connect as ``carol``, not as ``mike``::

      ansible -u mike -m ping myhost -u carol

Some parameters allow multiple values. In this case, Ansible will append all values from the hosts listed in inventory files inventory1 and inventory2::

   ansible -i /path/inventory1 -i /path/inventory2 -m ping all

> The help for each :ref:`command-line tool<command_line_tools>` specifies which parameters allow for multiple entries.

Reviewer 2: Hm. Looks like this is not exactly true: https://docs.ansible.com/ansible/devel/cli/ansible.html - I don't see anything about "allows multiple entries" here.

Reviewer 2: addressed by f3ce501e720e2ba577873a22dc641fe470f4444d

Most command-line options deal with generic settings, but some settings are specific to connections and strategies.
Passing these options at the command-line may feel like the highest-precedence options, but command-line options have low precedence - they override configuration only. They do not override playbook keywords, variables from inventory or variables from playbooks.

> You can override all other settings from all other sources in all other precedence categories at the command line with ``--extra-vars var_name=value``, but that is not a command-line option, it is a variable.

Reviewer: Add a xref to the variable section below here  so it's obvious we're talking about that highest precedence option

When setting variables in playbooks, remember that there are a couple of levels of scoping in playbooks. The first is 'playbook object scope'::

   - hosts: localhost
     gather_facts: false
     vars:
       me: play
     tasks:
       - name: the value is the play level one
         debug: var=me
       - block:
           - name: the block controls the value here
             debug: var=me
         vars:
           me: inblock
       - name: the task overrides the play level value
         debug: var=me
         vars:
           me: debugtask

       - name: we are back to the play scope value
         debug: var=me

These variables don't survive the playbook object they were defined in and will not be available to subsequent objects, including other plays.

> And there is also a 'host scope' - variables that are directly associated with the host (also available via the `hostvars[]` dictionary). The host scope variables are  available across plays and are  defined in inventory, vars plugins, or from modules (set_fact, include_vars).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
And there is also a 'host scope' - variables that are directly associated with the host (also available via the `hostvars[]` dictionary). The host scope variables are available across plays and are defined in inventory, vars plugins, or from modules (set_fact, include_vars).
```

.. _connection_precedence_rules:

> Controlling Ansible connections: precedence rules

Author: i named 'general precedence' as this affects a lot more than connections

Reviewer 2: resolved in ffec082fb09670b8a8d9b5ee88a951120972729d

.. contents:: Topics

How Ansible resolves configuration, data and keywords
=====================================================

> Ansible has many ways to specify certain information, specially when dealing with 'connections'

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Ansible has many ways to specify certain information, especially when dealing with 'connections'
```

as this information can be very sensitive to different factors and users have many different contexts to
deal with.

> This desgin allows Ansible to deal with heterogeneous environments, i.e when a host or group of hosts will have different 'connection' information than the others and should always be accessed in this way.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This design allows Ansible to deal with heterogeneous environments, that is, when a host or group of hosts have different 'connection' information than the others and should always be accessed in this way.
```

> You are not mandated to use the variables, but most people do out of convenience and then can get confused by their 'high precedence' and how to override them.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You are not required to use the variables, but most people do out of convenience and then can get confused by their 'high precedence' and how to override them.
```

In general the precedence is simple, when things are defined at the same level, 'last wins', as per the levels
this is the most general list, from least to most:

> 

Reviewer: Sorry not sure what the above sentence is trying to say.

Author: not sure how to rephrase, basically 'last defined' or 'last loaded' overwrites existing

>  Configuration

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Configuration
```

> In general the precedence is simple, the higher precedence overwrites the lower ones, when things are defined in the same precedence category, 'last defined' wins and overwrites previous definitions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In general the precedence is simple - the higher precedence overwrites the lower ones. When things are defined in the same precedence category, 'last defined' wins and overwrites previous definitions.
```

>  Command Line options

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Command Line options
```

>  Playbooks

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Playbooks
```

>  Connection variables

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Connection variables
```

> Some of these entries are not self evident and others also have their own internal levels and precedence, see them expanded below.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Some of these entries are not self evident and others also have their own internal levels and precedence, as explained below.
```

.. _what_is_configuration:

Configuration
`````````````

> This mainly reffers to 2 things, 'the ansible configuration file' and environment variables. The internal precedence is as follows (from least to most):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This mainly refers to two things, 'the Ansible configuration file' and environment variables. The internal precedence is as follows (from least to most):
```

>    configuration file (only first found used, they don't merge)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- configuration file (only first found used, they don't merge)
```

>       "value of ANSIBLE_CONFIG"

Reviewer: ```suggestion

  -  "value of ANSIBLE_CONFIG"
```

>       `./ansible.cfg`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   - `./ansible.cfg`
```

>       `~/.ansible.cfg`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   - `~/.ansible.cfg`
```

>       `/etc/ansible/ansible.cfg`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   - `/etc/ansible/ansible.cfg`
```

>    environment variable (this just follows normal shell precedence, last time defined overwrites previous values)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- environment variable (this just follows normal shell precedence, last time defined overwrites previous values)
```

You can use the ``ansible-config`` command line utility to see the current value of a configuration item and where it came from.

.. _command_line_options_precedence:

Command line options
`````````````````````

> The internal precedence is simple, but depends on the parameter used, 'last defined' wins (connects as carol, not mike)::

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The internal precedence is simple, but depends on the parameter used, 'last defined' wins. For example, the command below connects as carol, not mike::
```

      ansible -u mike -m ping myhost -u carol

> Unless the parameter allows for multiple entries and then they get appended (hosts are from inventory1 + inventory2)::

Reviewer: ```suggestion
That is true, unless the parameter allows for multiple entries and then they get appended. In the example below, the hosts are from inventory1 and inventory2::
```

   ansible -i /path/inventory1 -i /path/inventory2 -m ping all

The help for each tool specifies which parameters allow for multiple entries.

> Most of these options are supposed to deal with generic settings, but over time some very connection and strategy specific ones were added, they are also the main source of confusion as most of them have low precedence,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Most of these options are supposed to deal with generic settings. Over time some, very connection and strategy specific ones were added. These additions are the main source of confusion as most of them have low precedence,
```

> they are mostly meant to override configuration (which does NOT include playboks, inventory nor variables).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and are mostly meant to override configuration (which does NOT include playbooks, inventory, or variables).
```

> The one exception is 'extra vars' which sets variables with the highest precedence .. and since 'conneciton variables' are also the highest precedence it creates a short circut to it's own options::

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The one exception is 'extra vars' which sets variables with the highest precedence .. and since 'conneciton variables' are also the highest precedence it creates a conflict with its own options::
```

   ansible -u myuser -e 'ansible_user=notmyuser' -a whoami all

This is the main source of confusion for people using Ansible, the above statement makes a redundant use of `-u` since it will be overriden by `ansible_user`. There is a reason for this and it has mostly to do with

> how varied different installations are, `-u` makes sense when you don't use ``ansible_user`` anywhere, it allows you to override the 'current user' or configuration entries, but once you start using variables, you need

Reviewer: ```suggestion
how varied different installations are. The `-u` makes sense when you don't use ``ansible_user`` anywhere, as it allows you to override the 'current user' or configuration entries. Once you start using variables, however, you need
```

> to keep in mind that they have high precedence making these options less useful in your context.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
to keep in mind that they have high precedence making these other options less useful in your context.
```

.. _playbook_precedence:

Playbook keywords
`````````````````

> This is probably the simplest one as it flows with the playbook itself, the more specific wins against the more general:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is probably the simplest one as it flows with the playbook itself. The more specific wins against the more general:
```

>    play (most general)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- play (most general)
```

>    blocks/includes/imports/roles (optional and can contain tasks and each other)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- blocks/includes/imports/roles (optional and can contain tasks and each other)
```

>    tasks (most specific)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- tasks (most specific)
```

A simple example::

   - hosts: all
     connection: ssh
     tasks:

>        - name: uses ssh

Reviewer: ```suggestion
       - name: This task uses ssh.
```

         ping:

>        - name: test paramiko

Reviewer: ```suggestion
       - name: This task uses paramiko.
```

         connection: paramiko
         ping:

> The connection keyword is set at play level, all objects inside the play inherit it, but can also override it, the example above shows us doing so in a task, but a block/role will also work,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The ``connection: ssh``  is set at play level. All objects inside the play inherit it, but can also override it.  The example above shows us doing so in a task, with ``connection: paramiko``. A block/role will also work to override the play setting.
```

> anything that can be contained in a play and that contains tasks itself is in the inheritance path.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Anything that can be contained in a play and that contains tasks itself is in the inheritance path.
```

> Just to note these are KEYWORDS, not variables, both playbooks and variable files are defined in YAML but they have different significance.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Just to note these are KEYWORDS, not variables. Both playbooks and variable files are defined in YAML but they have different significance.
```

> Playbooks are the command or 'state description' strucutre for Ansible, variables are data we use to help make the playbooks more dynamic.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Playbooks are the command or 'state description' structure for Ansible. Variables are data we use to help make the playbooks more dynamic.
```

.. _connection_variables_flexible_confusion:

Connection Variables
````````````````````

Connection variables are 'normal variables' with specific names we have set as overrides for specific play keywords and configuration entries.

> They are still just variables, data, not keywords nor configuration items. These variables are used to override host/group specific information needed to execute the actions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
They are still just variables (data, not keywords or configuration items). These variables are used to override host/group specific information needed to execute the actions.
```

Originally this was just 'connection parameters' but has been expanded to things like selecting the correct temporary directory to use and the correct python/ruby/powershell/etc interpreter to invoke for a module.

> In the end they are just variables and follow normal variable precedence, which we already list here: https://docs.ansible.com/ansible/latest/user_guide/playbooks_variables.html#variable-precedence-where-should-i-put-a-variable

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the end they are just variables and follow normal variable precedence. See :ref:`ansible_variable_precedence`.
```

> You also need to keep in mind there are a couple of levels of scoping in playbooks, the first is 'playbook object scope'::

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You also need to keep in mind there are a couple of levels of scoping in playbooks. The first is 'playbook object scope'::
```

   - hosts: localhost
     gather_facts: false
     vars:
       me: play
     tasks:
       - name: the value is the play level one
         debug: var=me
       - block:
           - name: the block controls the value here
             debug: var=me
         vars:
           me: inblock
       - name: the task overrides the play level value
         debug: var=me
         vars:
           me: debugtask

       - name: we are back to the play scope value
         debug: var=me

> These variables don't survive the playbook object they were defined in and will not be availabel to subsequent objects, including other plays.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These variables don't survive the playbook object they were defined in and will not be available to subsequent objects, including other plays.
```

> And there is also a 'host scope', variables that are directly associated with the host (also available via the `hostvars[]` dictionary), which is availablel across plays, these are variables defined in inventory, vars plugins or from modules (set_fact, include_vars).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
And there is also a 'host scope' - variables that are directly associated with the host (also available via the `hostvars[]` dictionary). The host  scope variables are  available across plays and are  defined in inventory, vars plugins, or from modules (set_fact, include_vars).
```

> All of the above makes knowing where to define a variable and it's overrides a complex subject, but only if you start using many different ways to define a variable, normally you only use a few and just need to know the interactions between those methods.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
All of the above makes knowing where to define a variable and its overrides a complex subject, but only if you start using many different ways to define a variable. Normally you only use a few and just need to know the interactions between those methods.
```

.. _connection_precedence_rules:

> Controlling how Ansible connects to managed nodes

Author: this is not really the scope of the document, its not just how to connect, it is much more than that

Reviewer 2: ah, thanks - addressed in ffec082fb09670b8a8d9b5ee88a951120972729d

=================================================

> To give you maximum flexibility in managing your environments, Ansible supports many ways to specify connection information.

Author: same as above, this is not connection specific, though connection info is big part of this

If you use Ansible to manage a large number of servers, network devices, and cloud resources, you may define connection details for managed nodes in several different places and pass them to Ansible in several different ways.
This flexibility is convenient, but it can backfire if you do not understand the precedence rules and how to override them.

.. contents::
   :local:

Precedence categories
---------------------

> Ansible supports five categories of connection information. In order of precedence from lowest (most easily overridden) to highest (overrides all others), the categories are:

Author: again, its not connection specific

You can use the ``ansible-config`` command line utility to see the current value of a configuration item and where it came from.

Command-line options
--------------------

Any command-line option will override any configuration setting.

At the command line, if you pass multiple values for a parameter that accepts only a single value, the 'last defined' value wins. For example, this ad-hoc task will connect as ``carol``, not as ``mike``::

      ansible -u mike -m ping myhost -u carol

Some parameters allow multiple values. In this case, Ansible will append all values from the hosts listed in inventory files inventory1 and inventory2)::

   ansible -i /path/inventory1 -i /path/inventory2 -m ping all

The help for each tool specifies which parameters allow for multiple entries.

Most command-line options deal with generic settings, but some settings are specific to connections and strategies.

> Passing these options at the command-line may feel like the highest-precedence options, but command-line options have low precedence - they override configuration only. They do not override playbook keywords, variables from inventory or variables from playbooks.

Author: not sure this is enough, the original was meant to clarify one of the most common misconceptions and I think an example is needed for users to see exactly what is meant.

Playbook keywords
-----------------

> Any playbook keyword will override any command-line option (but not extra variables passed at the command line with ``-e``) and any configuration setting.

Author: this is misleading, keywords override options, but not variables (command line or not)

Reviewer 2: yeah, I see what you mean - resolved in ffec082fb09670b8a8d9b5ee88a951120972729d

And there is also a 'host scope' - variables that are directly associated with the host (also available via the `hostvars[]` dictionary). The host  scope variables are  available across plays and are  defined in inventory, vars plugins, or from modules (set_fact, include_vars).

Using ``-e`` extra variables at the command line
------------------------------------------------

> To override all other settings in all other categories, you can use extra variables: ``--extra-vars`` or ``-e`` at the command line. Values passed with ``-e`` are variables, not command-line options, and they will override command-line options as well as variables set elsewhere. For example this task will connect as ``brian`` not as ``carol``::

Author: isn't this covered already in variable precedence doc?

Reviewer 2: It is covered there. I thought it was worth covering again here for two reasons. First, extra vars are a bit confusing (it's a variable, but because you pass it on the command line, it "feels" like a command-line option). Second, because users may find this page when they're looking for a quick fix for a setting that isn't getting set the way they want - and giving them the "big hammer" option right there on the same page may help them.

Reviewer: +1 for keeping this here. As a precedence newbie, it was an important point for me to learn.
